Cite: 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/excerpts-presidents-remarks-4142009
 

THE WHITE HOUSE 

Office of the Press Secretary

_________________________________________________________________  For Immediate Release                               April 14, 2009   

EXCERPTS FROM THE PRESIDENT’S REMARKS   A New Foundation   Tuesday, April 14th, 2009  Washington, DC

As Prepared for Delivery

Today, I want to step back for a moment and explain our strategy as clearly as I can.  I want to talk about what we’ve done, why we’ve done it, and what we have left to do.  I want to update you on the progress we’ve made, and be honest about the pitfalls that may lie ahead.  And most of all, I want every American to know that each action we take and each policy we pursue is driven by a larger vision of America’s future – a future where sustained economic growth creates good jobs and rising incomes; a future where prosperity is fueled not by excessive debt, reckless speculation, and fleeing profit, but is instead built by skilled, productive workers; by sound investments that will spread opportunity at home and allow this nation to lead the world in the technologies, innovations, and discoveries that will shape the 21st century.  That is the America I see.  That is the future I know we can have. 

All of these actions – the Recovery Act, the bank capitalization program, the housing plan, the strengthening of the non-bank credit market, the auto plan, and our work at the G20 – have been necessary pieces of the recovery puzzle.  They have been designed to increase aggregate demand, get credit flowing again to families and businesses, and help them ride out the storm.  And taken together, these actions are starting to generate signs of economic progress.  Because of our recovery plan, schools and police departments have cancelled planned layoffs.  Clean energy companies and construction companies are re-hiring workers to build everything from energy efficient windows to new roads and highways.  Our housing plan has helped lead to a spike in the number of homeowners who are taking advantage of historically-low mortgage rates by refinancing, which is like putting a $2,000 tax cut in your in pocket.  Our program to support the market for auto loans and student loans has started to unfreeze this market and securitize more of this lending in the last few weeks.  And small businesses are seeing a jump in loan activity for the first time in months. 

This is all welcome and encouraging news, but it does not mean that hard times are over.  2009 will continue to be a difficult year for America’s economy.  The severity of this recession will cause more job loss, more foreclosures, and more pain before it ends.  The market will continue to rise and fall.  Credit is still not flowing nearly as easily as it should.  The process for restructuring AIG and the auto companies will involve difficult and sometimes unpopular choices.  All of this means that there is much more work to be done.  And all of this means that you can continue to expect an unrelenting, unyielding, day-by-day effort from this administration to fight for economic recovery on all fronts. 

It is simply not sustainable to have a 21st century financial system that is governed by 20th century rules and regulations that allowed the recklessness of a few to threaten the entire economy.  It is not sustainable to have an economy where in one year, 40% of our corporate profits came from a financial sector that was based too much on inflated home prices, maxed out credit cards, overleveraged banks and overvalued assets; or an economy where the incomes of the top 1% have skyrocketed while the typical working household has seen their income decline by nearly $2,000.  

For as some were chasing ever-bigger bonuses and short-term profits over the last decade, we continued to neglect the long-term threats to our prosperity:  the crushing burden that the rising cost of health care is placing on families and businesses; the failure of our education system to prepare our workers for a new age; the progress that other nations are making on clean energy industries and technologies while we remain addicted to foreign oil; the growing debt that we’re passing on to our children.  And even after we emerge from the current recession, these challenges will still represent major obstacles that stand in the way of our success in the 21st century. 

There is a parable at the end of the Sermon on the Mount that tells the story of two men.  The first built his house on a pile of sand, and it was destroyed as soon as the storm hit.  But the second is known as the wise man, for when "…the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house…it fell not:  for it was founded upon a rock."

We cannot rebuild this economy on the same pile of sand.  We must build our house upon a rock.  We must lay a new foundation for growth and prosperity – a foundation that will move us from an era of borrow and spend to one where we save and invest; where we consume less at home and send more exports abroad. 

It’s a foundation built upon five pillars that will grow our economy and make this new century another American century:  new rules for Wall Street that will reward drive and innovation; new investments in education that will make our workforce more skilled and competitive; new investments in renewable energy and technology that will create new jobs and industries; new investments in health care that will cut costs for families and businesses; and new savings in our federal budget that will bring down the debt for future generations.  That is the new foundation we must build.  That is our future.

I’ve talked a lot about the fundamental weakness in our economy that led us to this day of reckoning.  But we also arrived here because of a fundamental weakness in our political system.

For too long, too many in Washington put off hard decisions for some other time on some other day.  There’s been a tendency to score political points instead of rolling up sleeves to solve real problems.  There is also an impatience that characterizes this town – an attention span that has only grown shorter with the twenty-four news cycle, and insists on instant gratification in the form of instant results or higher poll numbers.  When a crisis hits, there’s all too often a lurch from shock to trance, with everyone responding to the tempest of the moment until the furor has died away and the media coverage has moved on, instead of confronting the major challenges that will shape our future in a sustained and focused way. 

This can’t be one of those times.  The challenges are too great.  The stakes are too high.  I know how difficult it is for Members of Congress in both parties to grapple with some of the big decisions we face right now.  It’s more than most congresses and most presidents have to deal with in a lifetime. 

But we have been called to govern in extraordinary times.  And that requires an extraordinary sense of responsibility – to ourselves, to the men and women who sent us here, and to the many generations whose lives will be affected for good or for ill because of what we do here. 

There is no doubt that times are still tough.  By no means are we out of the woods just yet.  But from where we stand, for the very first time, we are beginning to see glimmers of hope.  And beyond that, way off in the distance, we can see a vision of an America’s future that is far different than our troubled economic past.  It’s an America teeming with new industry and commerce; humming with new energy and discoveries that light the world once more.  A place where anyone from anywhere with a good idea or the will to work can live the dream they’ve heard so much about. 

It is that house upon the rock.  Proud, sturdy, and unwavering in the face of the greatest storm.  We will not finish it in one year or even many, but if we use this moment to lay that new foundation; if we come together and begin the hard work of rebuilding; if we persist and persevere against the disappointments and setbacks that will surely lie ahead, then I have no doubt that this house will stand and the dream of our founders will live on in our time

##