Cite: 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/remarks-president-after-reading-second-grade-class
 

REMARKS BY THE PRESIDENT AFTER READING TO THE SECOND GRADE CLASS

Capital City Public Charter School   Washington, D.C. 

  2:33 P.M. EST      

     THE PRESIDENT:  Well, listen, you guys, you've been terrific.  Thank you so much for your hospitality --

     MRS. OBAMA:  -- your good questions. 

     THE PRESIDENT:  -- your excellent questions.

     MRS. OBAMA:  -- your outstanding listening skills.

     THE PRESIDENT:  You're excellent listeners.  And the reason we came to visit, A, we wanted to get out of the White House; B, we wanted to see you guys; but C, the other thing we wanted to tell everybody is that this kind of innovative school, the outstanding work that's being done here by the entire staff, and the parents who are so active and involved, is an example of how all our schools should be. 

     And what I've asked Arne Duncan to do is to make sure that he works as hard as he can over the next several years to make sure that we're reforming our schools, that we're rewarding innovation the way that it's taking place here, that we're encouraging parents to be involved, that we're raising standards for all children so that everybody can learn -- especially things like math and science that are going to be so important for the jobs of the future.

     And so we're very proud of what's been accomplished at this school and we want to make sure that we're duplicating that success all across the country.  So nothing is going to be more important than this.  And the recovery and reinvestment act that we've put forward will provide billions of dollars to build schools and help with school construction.  It will provide money to train teachers, especially in subjects like math and science that are so critical.  And it will also give Secretary Duncan the resources he needs to reward excellent, innovative schools.  And so we think it's really important for the country that we get that bill passed.    

     But thank you so much, everybody.  Appreciate you.

     MRS. OBAMA:  Thank you, guys.  This was fun.  (Applause.)

                                               END         2:35 P.M. EST

   