Cite: 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2011/03/19/remarks-president-during-us-brazil-ceo-forum-discussion-brasilia-brazil

March 19, 2011          
For Immediate Release          

Remarks by the President during U.S.-Brazil CEO Forum Discussion in Brasilia, Brazil

The White House

Office of the Press Secretary

Palácio do Itamaraty
	Brasilia, Brazil

1:33 P.M. BRT
	 
	THE PRESIDENT:  I just want to begin by thanking President Rousseff for her extraordinary hospitality, to the Brazilian companies who are here, many of whom have investments in the United States.  We’re grateful for the dialogue with our colleagues from the north.
	 
	As I stated in the statement that I just made before coming here, Brazil is on the rise.  And the United States is excited and fully supportive of Brazil’s rapid expansion, its extraordinary talent, its resources, its enormous potential that’s now being realized in part because of the outstanding leadership of President Rousseff.
	 
	And I think the goal today -- so I’m not going to speak long -- but essentially to make sure that we work to facilitate an effective dialogue.  I know that there are a couple of areas where we’re going to be announcing agreements -- an agreement on trade and economic cooperation, an open skies agreement.  I know those are two issues that everybody was advocating.  We’re going to announce them today, so we’re pleased to do that.  I know there’s been some work done on extending visas for both countries, and although we haven’t gotten all that worked through, we are making progress, and we will continue to do so.
	 
	Brazil is going to be hosting several important sporting events over the next few years.  I mentioned that it pains me to say this when it comes to the Olympics -- (laughter) -- Lula beat me on that one.  (Laughter.)  But we want to make sure that through this forum, economies that have both the expertise on security and infrastructure, that they will potentially participate. 
	 
	On energy, obviously, Brazil is a major player on the world stage.  (Press is ushered out.)
	 
	END
	1:35 P.M. BRT