Cite: 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2011/04/25/remarks-president-and-first-lady-2011-easter-egg-roll

April 25, 2011          
For Immediate Release          

Remarks by the President and First Lady at the 2011 Easter Egg Roll

The White House

Office of the Press Secretary


	South Lawn


	10:30 A.M. EDT


	THE PRESIDENT:  Hello, everybody.  (Applause.)  I hope all of you had a wonderful Easter.  I hope everybody is having a great time here.  Welcome to the White House.  (Applause.)


	In addition to our outstanding Easter Bunny, I want to introduce somebody who is doing extraordinary work not only helping military families, not only making sure that everybody is getting up and going, but is also keeping me in line, the First Lady of the United States, Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)


	MRS. OBAMA:  Is everybody having a good time?


	AUDIENCE:  Yes!


	MRS. OBAMA:  It is a beautiful day just for you.  Let’s give Colbie Caillat a big round of applause.  She did a great job.  (Applause.)


	We are so excited about this year’s Easter Egg Roll.  The theme is “Get up and Go,” because as you know, I’m a big proponent of getting up and going, making sure we’re moving and eating healthy.  And this Easter Egg Roll reflects all of that, so while you’re here in addition to listening to some great music and dancing a little bit, you can roll your eggs.  You can do some yoga.  You can play with some -- do some obstacle course, play basketball and tennis. 


	We’ve got wonderful storytellers over at Storytime Stage.  Everyone has just been terrific.  I want to thank all of the talent, all of the people who volunteered here today.  Let’s give our volunteers a big round of applause -- (applause) -- because we couldn’t do this without them.


	Today we’re going to have a record number of 30,000 people coming through the South Lawn.  That’s pretty amazing.  So I think now it’s time for us to stop talking and “Get up and Go,” and do some moving.  So with that we’re going to come down and kick off the Easter Egg Roll.


	Thank you all.  Have a great a time.  (Applause.)


	END
	10:33 A.M. EDT 