Cite: 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2012/08/20/remarks-president-kids-state-dinner

August 20, 2012          
For Immediate Release          

Remarks by the President at Kids' State Dinner

The White House

Office of the Press Secretary


	East Room


	12:12 P.M. EDT


	THE PRESIDENT:  It looks spectacular!  Hello, everybody.


	AUDIENCE:  Hello!


	THE PRESIDENT:  Have a seat.  Everybody have a seat.  Now, I heard that there was a state dinner going on here -- and usually I get invited to the state dinners.  (Laughter.)  So this time I just had to crash -- (laughter) -- I had to crash the party because I did not want to miss out on all the fun.


	I'm not going to speak long because I know that there's some entertainment coming that is more entertaining than me.  (Laughter.)  But I do want to say I couldn't be prouder of my wife, Michelle -- (applause) -- because she took up this cause of healthy eating because she's a mom, and like the other moms in the room --


	MRS. OBAMA:  And dads. 


	THE PRESIDENT:  -- and dads, and grandparents in the room, sometimes we have to get on the younger people about eating healthy.  And that personal experience then translated into all the great work she's been doing.  And she's helped to mobilize a movement around the country to give parents more choices and more information so that they can work with their kids to make sure their kids are healthy.


	But in addition to being proud of her, I could not be prouder of you, the young people, because it's hard enough to follow a recipe and make something good to eat.  I'm not a great cook.  I'm an okay cook.  I can make a good omelet and -- (laughter) -- toast -- (laughter) --


	MRS. OBAMA:  Chili.


	THE PRESIDENT:  I make a very good chili, it's true.  But, look, let's face it, I don't cook that often these days.  But I remember cooking and it's not always easy to make something that people like to eat.  Then for you guys to actually come up with recipes that are healthy and tasty, and to do it in a way that helps to contribute to spreading the word about healthy eating among your peers -- that's a really big deal. 


	So we're very proud of you.  We're very impressed with everything that you've done.  I hope you guys are having a good time while you're here.  Everybody, by the way, looks very sharp, looks very good. 


	I only have one request for you, and that is try not to drop any scraps on the floor because Bo -- (laughter) -- Bo is on a diet right now and he will eat anything that he sees, especially some of the tasty meals that you guys have prepared.


	So thank you very much, everybody.  Good luck.  (Applause.)


	END
	2:15P.M. EDT