Cite: 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/11/15/weekly-address-open-enrollment-starts-today

November 15, 2014          
For Immediate Release          

Weekly Address: Open Enrollment Starts Today

The White House

Office of the Press Secretary

WASHINGTON, DC — In this week’s address, the President reminded Americans that Affordable Care Act open enrollment begins this weekend.  In the past year more than 10 million people have gained health insurance, including more than seven million who enrolled in Health Insurance Marketplace coverage.  They are proof that the Affordable Care Act is working, making health care more affordable, accessible, and of higher quality for millions of people.  The President encouraged all Americans to take advantage of open enrollment, and remind their friends and families to do so as well.

The audio of the address and video of the address will be available online at www.whitehouse.gov at 6:00 a.m. ET, November 15, 2014.

Remarks of President Barack Obama
Weekly Address
The White House
November 15, 2014

Hi, everybody.  Over the past year, more than 10 million Americans have gained the financial security and peace of mind that comes with health insurance. 

More than seven million people enrolled in affordable coverage by visiting HealthCare.gov, or going to the marketplace in their state.  On average, they’re paying just $82 a month for coverage.  For a lot of people, that’s less than a cell phone bill or a cable bill.  Insurance companies can no longer deny you coverage just because you have a preexisting condition, and they now have to cover free preventive care like checkups and mammograms. 

If you missed your chance to get covered last year, here’s the good news.  Starting November 15th, today, you can go online or call 1-800-318-2596 and get covered for 2015.  And we’ve spent the last year improving and upgrading HealthCare.gov, to make it faster and easier to use. 

If you already buy insurance through the online marketplace, now is the time to take a look at some new options for next year.  You might be able to save more money, or find a plan that fits your family’s needs even better than the one you’ve got now.  If you haven’t signed up for insurance yet, this is your chance.  Odds are, you’ll qualify for tax credits to help you afford it. 

But this window won’t stay open forever.  You only have three months to shop for plans, so it’s worth starting right away.  And it might make a big difference for your family’s bottom line.

Last year, I got an email from a woman named Amy Williams, in Augusta, Georgia.  She and her husband are self-employed in the trucking business.  For years, they paid about $1,200 a month for their health insurance.  Then they checked out HealthCare.gov.  They found a plan with coverage they liked, and it was way less expensive.  She says that they’ve saved around $13,000 on their premiums this year alone. 

Stories like Amy’s are why we fought so hard to pass the Affordable Care Act.  To help more families breathe a little easier.  In part because this law is working, health care prices have grown at their slowest rate in nearly 50 years.  And this year, insurance premiums for families who are covered through an employer grew at a rate tied for the lowest on record. 

So spread the word.  Tell your friends and family members to get covered.  Talk to folks in your church or your classroom.  Tell them to take a few minutes to check out Healthcare.gov, CuidadoDeSalud.gov, or call 1-800-318-2596 – it can make a big difference in their lives.  Let them know that it’s easy, it’s affordable, and that they have just three months, starting today, November 15th, to sign up.  Together, we can make sure that even more of America gets covered in the year ahead.

Thanks, and have a great weekend. 