Cite: 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2012/04/09/remarks-president-and-first-lady-white-house-easter-egg-roll

April 09, 2012          
For Immediate Release          

Remarks by the President and the First Lady at the White House Easter Egg Roll

The White House

Office of the Press Secretary


	South Lawn
	The White House


	10:46 A.M. EDT


	THE PRESIDENT:  Good morning, everybody!  (Applause.)  How about Rachel Crow?  Give her a big round of applause.  (Applause.) 


	I want to wish everybody a wonderful Easter.  And we are so thrilled that all of you could join us here today.  My job is very simple:  It is to introduce the powerhouse of the White House, the one truly in charge, as Malia, Sasha and Bo all know -- the First Lady of the United States, Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)


	MRS. OBAMA:  Thank you, honey.  (Applause.)  My job is simple as well.  I just want to officially welcome you all to the White House Easter Egg Roll.  It is a beautiful day, perfect weather.  We are so excited to have you all here.  We've got a great set of activities planned for you.  There's something for everyone.  We're going to be over there doing a little egg roll.  I think the President is going to try to beat a three-year-old -- which I hope he does not.  (Laughter.)


	But we also have a wonderful yoga garden.  We've got some story-time guests.  We've got great readers here this year, as we do every year.  You can get your face painted.  We've got wonderful musical guests.  Rachel was amazing, and she's a really sweet kid, which is more important.  We've got wonderful athletes here.  We've got Chris Evert -- my gosh.  (Applause.)  And many, many others -- the Harlem Globetrotters are here.  (Applause.)  You can do an obstacle course.  We're going to be down at the kitchen learning how to do some healthy cooking with the -- some of our celebrity chefs. 


	So it's a wonderful day, and I hope you all enjoy it.  I hope you put on your comfortable shoes.  We've got ours on, right, all the Obamas here. 


	So on behalf of our family, I also want to wish you all a happy Easter and a happy Easter Egg Roll.  So in the theme of this year's Easter Egg Roll, let's go, let's play -- let's move!  (Applause.)


	THE PRESIDENT:  Thank you, everybody.  Have a great time.  We'll see you down there.  (Applause.)


	                                                                                                   
	END                    
	10:48 A.M. EDT